[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smarte
economy podcast a production of
neon.pdf Aztec a privacy focused L2
being built on top of ethereum in this
conversation we discussed the need for
privacy in general and on chain Aztec as
a privacy Network to be built on top of
multiple layer ones how the team built a
programmable privacy tool and network
the need for decentralization in privacy
oriented networks Aztec's upcoming main
net launch and much more just a reminder
nothing said on this podcast is a
solicitation to buy or sell any tokens
and that the guest or host might hold
tokens discussed in any given episode
you can check out a disclaimer on
www.newsday.com if you enjoyed this
episode please don't hesitate to rate
and review it on your favorite
podcasting platform and also share it
with your friends and family every
rating review and comment helps us reach
more people and bring you more of your
favorite guests with all that said I
really enjoyed speaking with Zach and I
hope you enjoy the conversation too hey
everyone welcome to the smart economy
podcast today we're joined by Zach
Williamson the CEO and co-founder of
Aztec a privacy first L2 built on
ethereum how you doing today Zach hi
there Dylan thanks for having me on um
I'm doing well life is good you know New
Year um busy busy building what more
could anybody want New Year same us I
love it um this is going to be my eth
year in the blockchain and crypto space
and you're quite an OG yourself building
building out since 2017 so I can't wait
to dig further into um you know where
you came from and and and why you're
here and what you're building but before
we kind of um start all that I do kind
of want to get like a a highle
perspective and before we hit the record
button um I was I was mentioning that I
remember vitalic in December 23 January
24 talking about this 2024 being the
year that ZK kind of came to fruition um
we saw a lot of M Nets launch we saw
Aztec release um test net and other
tools and um protocols so do you share
that sentiment that 2024 was the year
that ZK finally became real for the
blockchain space so I partially agree I
think there are some Nuance here um
first let's take a step back you know I
I've been doing this for eight years now
and in 2017 zero knowledge techn
cryptography ZK technology was um an
extremely rare Niche thing um it only
had really been deployed into a
meaningful into production in a
meaningful way in zcash um which was
considered you know un um which was
considered this insane Moon maath by
most people that was completely not
understandable uh and now Flash Forward
8 years now in 2024 you know you have
the deployment of multiple ZK l2s you
have uh um a vibrant ecosystem of
offchain ZK Based Services that are
adding value to blockchain um like sp1
like Risk zero where you can prove
computations offline put them on chain
and so I do think 2024 was a a major
year for ZK because it meant it it made
the technology um
uh well real exist you know it was
deployed into products and services that
that you could use um in in in a in a
quite a large way uh I do think however
that there is a long way to go I'm very
biased here because you know I'm the CEO
of astec and 2025 is um the intended
year that Aztec launches so obviously I
think 2025 is the year but um there's a
lot of difficulty in converting a
technology solution into a product uh
and that was clearly shown in 2024 uh
you know I think whilst there's been a
lot of l2s deployed um ZK l2s I don't
believe any of them are decentralized um
for example which uh and um there are
major obstacles um present to in doing
that whilst whilst maintaining the
existing um levels of liveness and
transaction through it uh and obviously
the main thing for me is a lack of
privacy ZK is used for scaling but it's
also used for privacy and only scaling
was really meaningfully deployed in 2024
cool so I want to dig a lot further into
into Aztec and kind of what you've been
building since the conceptualization in
2017 but let's just quick get a little
background on you like what's your aha
moment when did
you discover Bitcoin or ethereum you
have a really cool background um you
aren't a cryptographer or computer
Scientist by trade so maybe you can
share a little bit about your journey
from physics to here as well yeah so I
was I originally in a past life I did a
PhD in in particle physics on some giant
experiment in Japan called Tokai to
kamoka and um yeah I remember reading
about Bitcoin when I was at University
uh and honestly back then you know my my
uh my my view of it was was that of the
unenlightened mainstream it was what is
this silly magic internet money it's you
know these are just magic beans nobody
cares it's pointless you know then over
time you know you get these articles
going oh Bitcoin is worth a dollar hm
that's interesting Bitcoin it's worth
$10 it's worth $100 maybe I should get
more involved in this Bitcoin thing um
and uh so it took a long time really uh
I was I was a skeptic all the way up
until
2017 when uh that was when I I kind of
i' done my PhD i' crashed out of
Academia like I had all these dreams of
becoming a you know a research scientist
trying to unpick the fabric of reality
but then uh you know actually trying to
do that um kind of was a was a mildly um
traumatic experience and I decided I was
better off just being a software
engineer so and then I um a friend of my
my brother's best friend basically a guy
called Tom poock he was doing this
wanted to do this technology startup on
a on on the ethereum blockchain to do
chatify services and he needed a
technical co-founder and I'm like well
that seems you know might as well I
wasn't doing anything interesting at the
time um and that was really what like it
was that was the kind of the aha moment
for me which was a bit different from
other from others I think which was when
talking with Tom I saw how he how you
could use this distributed consensus
Network for um to to improve things in
the real world as in like instead of
creating digital money digital
instruments I saw how you know you can
actually by creating digital records of
things that are like things in the real
world and and creating these services
that trade and mediate them without
intermediaries without third parties you
could improve a lot of what already came
before um which eventually let me around
to you know the whole de banking uh
unbank like unbank decentralized banking
um thesis and you know trying to replace
money trying to provide a lot more
financial autonomy for individuals but I
came about it in a very roundabout way
yeah you got brought in by actually
working on a project um our paths are
kind of similar uh I won't claim to be
as as intelligent as you were digging
into to physics and getting a PhD but I
too became disillusioned with my
previous career I was an urban planner
doing City plan
and just lost the zest and the Zeal
after studying in school and then going
into the real world and seeing how
terrible it is to work for bureaucratic
agencies um the disillusionment came
quickly and so 2017 was kind of like my
aha year as well where I started um
seeing sugar plums and fairies when it
came to the price of Bitcoin and
ethereum and where we could go um went
fulltime in 2018 and and that was a rude
awakening kind of building an a bear for
my first time
um so what was your perspective then in
in 2017 you you started working on a
traditional Financial tool product on
top of a distributed ledger so is this
where you kind of became aware of the
issues of privacy and maybe you can even
share uh a little bit about what the
perspectives of onchain privacy even
were in 2017 was it was it a thought um
were people even considering the the
potential issues that came with
transactions and being able to follow
and track them I think back then the
ecosystem was very very uh immature I
mean one could argue it still is
immature relative to what it's going to
be but particular back then I wasn't
aware of privacy really being much of a
concern or a
consideration um uh I mean typically
like if you if you're building a a
project in 2017 you know you're doing
something with defi maybe you're trying
you're doing something like Meadow well
you don't really care if it's not
private uh because you know everybody is
just a random onchain pudm you know your
Ox F3 QQ whatever and that's not really
linked to you in in any meaningful way
and so who cares about privacy for us it
was a bit different because we were
trying to use this technology to remove
a bunch of um bunch of middlemen in in
an existing industry and you know we
were trying to create these services
that would manage multi-billion dollar
portfolios where you just can't put that
kind of information on chain where the
where the the the information required
to trade these assets was um you know um
proprietary uh so for us it was a bit of
a rude awakening back then I was very
naive about privacy I thought you know
like surely if you just take your
transactions and split them into small
small Nationals and then just like send
them around lots of different addresses
and then combine them you know surely
it'll be fine surely nobody can tell
what's going on and in the winter of
2017 I I realized oh no that's not how
this works we have a real problem on our
hands uh um and yeah how the how do you
get transaction privacy in a in a in a
network where the the basic guarantee
that is that everybody can view every
transaction and therefore no it's legit
um yeah that's what led me into zero
knowledge cryptography and and that and
that research pathway so you're working
on Aztec now and I don't want to put
words in your mouth for for what
happened with the project back then and
why you're not working on the same
project that you started with Tom but
were you guys coming up
to the institutions the traditional guys
when you were trying to create these
disintermediating Services is that why
you're kind of where you're at now and
not still working on your original
project that brought you into the space
well you know I think I think if we
ground away at it we might have managed
to get something working um but it was
tough you know like I remember me and
like co-founders you putting on suits
and tires going into the city of London
and trying to like demo this uh little
deal platform we had called credit desk
you know to a bunch of bunch of Suits
who you know barely have to turn on the
computer and um uh it was it was a lot
got Lost in Translation I think the uh
we we got this rer working that actually
getting these people to sign up to this
bleeding edge technology solution even
if it would save them a lot of money
would be very hard to do um but that
wasn't really the main thrust the main
thrust was well like I done a bunch of
cryptography research to try and solve
this privacy problem and um managed you
with a lot of help succeed in creating a
ZK protocol that enabled this startup
was our startup called credit mint to
get transaction privacy but with with
this tool with technology we were like
wow this is this is a big deal um in
doing that research I got massively
pilled into privacy the idea of
combining um you know confidential
computation and confidential information
having confidential data on the
blockchain but still H gaining all the
benefits of decentralization and
distributed networks just seeing what
you could create with that technology
was so powerful was so captivating for
us it was a bit of a no-brainer you that
we we needed to Pivot into providing
this technology as an infrastructure
solution for for everybody instead of
just one specific product um so yeah it
was just uh I guess you could say I got
privacy pill you're going around uh as a
monkey in a suit realizing that the
people you're trying to pitch to aren't
quite get getting it and you've also
privacy pilled yourself trying to figure
out these ZK Solutions and build out ZK
architecture infrastructure and so you
know clearly the the disintermediation
service doesn't quite work out and the
of Aztec is founded so what was it like
in 2018 then how did you find your
Founders how did you conceptualize Ida
what you're going to start working on
what were kind of like the beginnings
what was the seed of Aztec then well the
beginnings of Aztec were credit I mean
it was the same organization same
Founders same people um so we'd already
got our team like a car fanic team
together so it was me it was Tom um and
uh Joe Andrews who is my current
co-founder and an shink so we were kind
of a four of us we' um we met uh Joe and
Arno on a startup accelerator called
entrepreneur first in 2017 we'd all
joined forces and so that I guess the
the process of of pting was basically
just us just talking a lot in um amongst
each other going like you know how are
we going to get this working um like can
we do something like with that's more
General than this credit mint idea um
and yeah so basically we decided in 2018
okay instead of doing this syndicated
loan thing which has a lot of different
actors in it you know which is uh where
we have to get you know sign Buy in from
a lot of people who technologically
skeptical let's try and create shielded
assets on ethereum instead let's do that
because that's valuable that's
interesting and then we can we could
because the the the tricky thing is once
we started pivoting like the goal from
that point on almost was always
programmable privacy basically create
creating that smart contract ecosystem
that ethereum enables but where you have
strong privacy guarantees you have
private State you know you can hide your
identity you can hide you can put
confidential data on chain that you can
use to prove things about yourself about
you know things in the real world that
was always the goal but we knew that the
tech we had at the time was was was
primitive and not capable of doing that
so the question on on mind was okay well
if we can get there in the long term how
do we demonstrate value today um and uh
so that we can have an opportunity
really to iterate on this technology and
improve it at time without running out
of money and so the plan was then yeah
okay let's create it's called Aztec 1.0
it was a um basic privacy shield for
ethereum with some very limited c
programmability um in in what a shield
of transaction was um and yeah we said
about doing that middle of 2018 got
working I believe at the uh I think it
was either the end of 2019 or the start
of 2020 so maybe we can um like a
highlevel philosophical question um and
maybe you have like a really nice C
response for this but why wasn't privacy
or privacy like tools um why aren't
these embedded natively into blockchain
networks why are they embedded because
they're hard CU they're they're bloody
nightmar is to build um you know I think
that like with Aztec we we're now in
2025 deploying um uh bu like our our
Network you know we should have test net
imminently where you can create a smart
contract we can have private data and
you can um create transactions and and
and basically have all the modc cons of
a normal blockchain but it took us took
us eight 8ish years to get there um and
required a lot of technological
innovation you know like in including
original research you know is not just
that we were taking research and turning
it into code we were doing the research
you know like we were like crafting our
own God mathematics and then turning
turning it into into into papers turning
into code it's bloody hard I mean
privacy has always been on the like the
the the the road map of ideas you know
you can you can you can go back into the
internet archives and see how fin
talking about zero knowledge and talking
about privacy and how important it was
but it was always one of these things
where we'll add it later because we
don't really know how to do it and now
we do more or less um but it's still a
very immature technology compared to
distributed consensus protocols so you
mentioned how finny um maybe this is a
nice opportunity for how you can guy how
you can kind of shill how Aztec is cre
keeping crypto and in blockchain cyppher
Punk oh yeah hell yeah so um I I okay
well I think without
privacy we're building a dystopia right
now with web 3 because we're basically
creating a warrantless financial
surveillance regime now it you know it
all it's all fun and games while we're
trading around tokens and we're all just
internet avatars and you know it's all a
bit virtual but but it doesn't take much
for for all this Tech to be packaged up
in a bow and then sold off to a to a to
a central bank or or national government
um and now you have a digital
transaction measure that everybody has
to every business has to use that can be
viewed by um by you know the state and
you no longer have Financial privacy I I
I think genuinely that there is a huge
incentive for State bureaucracies to try
to remove Financial privacy just just
because of pure incentive alignment um
you know like the less the less physical
cash in your system the easier it is to
understand what your economy to
understand to get acquire legibility
about what your what Your what your
people what your citizens are doing and
therefore how how to structure your
economy also prevent tax evasion
and um this is this this has the minor
issue of of of crushing what I would
view as personal Liberty because because
I think that money is an expression of
human agency and therefore Freedom you
know you can get people to to do things
that you want to do and they don't want
to do if you pay them you know you can
you can buy material Goods that you
would all allow you to express yourself
by through through money you know
through the through the clothes that you
buy and wear through the consumer goods
that you have
um you know I do believe that money is a
form of speech and uh it is a
fundamental human like I wouldn't even
say it's it's it's not just a right it's
a need to be able to um uh to to to have
privacy with with respect to one's
finances um and without yeah without
privacy we're building technology which
undermines all of this um it undermines
it's not just not Cypher Punk it's it's
the complete antithesis of cyer cyer
funk um and we're all kind of a little
bit willfully inter up this fact I think
because uh everyone's having a lot of
fun everybody's making money I don't
think anybody is thinking too much about
the longterm here and it's deeply
troubling yeah I think when we look at
just like the history of of Bitcoin and
and ethereum and crypto currencies
there's that kind of uh I think it was
Gandhi who said you know first they
ignore you then they laugh at you then
they fight you then then you win and I
think just broadly speaking at a global
level right now we're in the then they
fight you stage for the surviv Ral of
these networks and these new forms of
monies that we're going to that we're
trying to embed into the day-to-day
lives of of us and the unbanked um so we
have this kind of like overarching thing
that's happening to our industry but
then as you just mentioned you know
governments want to be able not even
governments just the state in general
wants to be able to monitor transactions
that occur and so privacy might even
have
um and privacy Builders and privacy
tools might even have more of a
magnifying glass over them so do you
feel this that um working in building on
Aztec uh do you have to fight these
narratives more like when folks are
saying privacy is for criminals why do
you have to hide what you're doing
unless you're doing something wrong do
you feel like there's uh a a stronger or
more of a force of a boot on your neck
or is this all just kind of like part of
the same
umbrella it's very complicated uh it is
it is partially part of the same
umbrella but also there are different
strengths and and weaknesses um for
example you know like the typical
anti-privacy narratives of you know oh I
have nothing to hide have nothing to
fear well you know this is it's not just
blockchain privacy which Which
experiences this you know like as as a
society we have had this like very long
discourse about the tension between um
Liberty and safety um for hundreds of
years where you know you you you cannot
have Liberty without privacy and you
cannot have perfect safety without full
transparency um and uh I think that our
societies are comfortable with this
existing with this tension and that many
precedents have been set that privacy is
important you know it's enshrined in the
European Convention of Human Rights the
right to a private life um it's uh with
the establishment of the internet like
there were some very strong principles
that were set that uh you know the
internet should be a neutral Network you
know like the government has not going
to hold um an um like an is like an ISP
responsible for the content gain through
their Fiber Optic Cables it's the
producing the consumer that are
responsible and and uh are the regulated
entities similarly you know um DNS
signers need to be neutral decentralized
networks need to be neutral and so these
principles have not yet been um uh
adapted to blockchain but they will be
because it's the same fundamental
concept um it's just going to take a bit
of time uh and a lot of grinding at the
at the cace um and certainly there's
going to be a lot of collateral damage
because there will be entities out there
which will want to undermine these
principles um in the same way that you
know you have you have entities you have
politicians you have bureaucrats that
are trying to ban encryption in the UK
and the EU because um uh you know under
the guise of of of safety and protection
um despite them themselves using
encrypting mess encrypted messaging apps
to avoid scrutiny from the media um
it'll take take time but I I I feel like
the values and necessity of privacy is
well established outside of the
blockchain sphere and that's not really
the case with distributed networks in
general as in with in with with with
internet currencies so I do I am I am
very bullish on the long term for
privacy particularly when it's
advantages and values are firmly
demonstrated um which I think we're
going to be doing with Aztec uh but it's
going to be a long a long grind for sure
so then maybe we can use this as an
opportunity for you to just kind of give
your quick 30 second elevator pitch for
for Aztec and what would you say that
Aztec's primary focuses is it shielded
transactions is it uh a plethora of
privacy tools for ethereum how would you
put it so we're a network we are um
enabling um privacy for the entire
blockchain ecosystem starting with
ethereum going to be the whole
blockchain ecosystem the value is far
beyond things like asset obis or the
typical use cases of privacy today um
for for me privacy is intrinsically
linked with identity um if if you want
to do things on chain that affect what
happens offchain then you need to um
provide a link between your
cryptocurrency account and your identity
in the real world being able to link who
you are in the real world and what you
who you are on chain right now requires
either third party middlemen or an
unacceptable amount of data um like data
leaking uh and asex sses basically you
can you can put in crypto credentials on
chain so that you can do things like
sign in with your Google account and
nobody knows that you've linked your
cryptocurrency account your Google
account except maybe Google um or
signning with Apple ID you can do things
like proofs of passport or proofs of
bank accounts um where you can prove not
just to a third party you can prove to
to a contract to a Smart contract nobody
else that you know you are a citizen of
a certain country or you possess a bank
account from a certain region and using
these Primitives you can start to create
really strong permissionless distributed
identity protocols that can you can use
to massively add value into the
blockchain network the reason why
blockchain has not touched the real
world in a meaningful way and touched
the mainstream is because of a lack of
privacy because privacy is linked to
Identity there's a reason why blockchain
infrastructure was not some base layer
that all apps use there's a reason why
when your grandparents are using some
app on the phone or they're they're
performing a payment that's not
happening under the hood through some
kind of blockchain infrastructure and
that reason is a lack of privacy you fix
privacy combined with scaling you you
change the world in my opinion you
change the world because you change what
money is you change it changes how we
interact with money it changes like how
we can create Financial Services it
massively liberates the entire space and
makes it much much easier to provide
competing and compelling Financial
Services um not just to people in the
develop world but the developing world
you can provide strong um guarantees um
around what's happening with your money
to people in the developing world who
don't live in a in a society with with a
with with with any strong rule of law
and this kind of stuff is is is really
revolutionary when fully expressed and
that's what we want to enable that we
want people to come in to our Network
and build whatever they want like to
serve what like to serve to serve their
business to set their project to set
their Hobbies um and give them the tools
to to to fully Express themselves on
chain what acts is more of a catalyst
for the integration of more robust
privacy tools is it the the individual
or is it like the group the institution
and I I have this thought experiment
quite often with one of my buddies here
it's surprising to me that um most
people don't get up in arms when they go
to a bar and have to show their ID to
prove they're 21 because we're also
showing the bartender and the bouncer
where I live why would I want to share
my address with a complete stranger but
we do this every day and we don't even
think twice about it for privacy to
become more of an embedded concern in
our society you would have to think that
maybe the individual would have to get
concerned about this first so this goes
back to to to my question how do we
embed how do we catalyze more privacy
tools is it do we have to have the
individual rise up or does it come more
from the top down an umbrella of
Institutions and and large scale
entities it's a very good question so
the naive thought is it can't come from
the individual because the individual
doesn't care about privacy this is the
the lint experience of of of of
everybody right now uh you know as much
as I wish we lived in a society where
people cared about privacy deeply
uh they don't um there's you know the
typical Revenue models for pretty much
every online service is mass uh data
surveillance and information harvesting
about who you are um there's probably a
few I algorithms kicking around the
world that know more about me than I
do and um so one would think okay well
people can't pay for priv people don't
care about privacy they're not going to
pay for it therefore it has to come from
institutions but let's take it a little
deeper because privacy is a spectrum and
at some point people do care
um and it's all about demonstrating
value let me give you an example if
there was an ATM uh that when you used
it screamed out to the entire Street um
how much money was in your bank account
would you use ATM or would you be
willing to walk one minute around the
block and use one that actually didn't
do that you know how many people
listening to this podcast episode will
be comfortable going on Twitter and
tweeting out to the world um how what
their salary was uh or the size of their
mortgage or or or the size of their
debts
people care about privacy in that regard
um you know
uh you and so so there's a balance here
um people care a lot about financial
privacy um they don't care so much about
privacy around their own their their
other not like information that they
don't they don't consider monetizable
but Advertiser certainly do um and so
the way that I think this space is going
to succeed where privacy is going to
become a big deal is what is by enabling
decentral ized networks to um uh to
carry fin like services and products
that users traditionally expect privacy
from I think that the um for example if
if if a successful micro payments
network is ever going to take off on
chain I suspect I I expect it to carry
some Financial privacy requirements um
if you have uh onchain um lending that's
linked to anything in the real world
that's going to come with privacy um
requirements I think if you do income
streaming in a meaningful way that
really takes off that's going to have
privacy requirements and and so I think
Financial privacy is is the the first
thing that's important
um I also think that soor it's a bit of
a long answer um there is something
subtle about ZK and privacy which it
enables something which isn't possible
previously um and that's this concept of
um uh extracting information from from
data modes what do I mean by that um so
you know we have there are a lot of
online services these days that um you
know that their monetization model is
you they will use information harvesting
advertising and they will basically
collect data about you that they will
keep to themselves take Facebook for
example um now let's say you wanted to
create a rival Network um and you you
want to in order to onboard users
efficiently you wanted to um uh you know
um take all the data that Facebook has
about a user and move it to well right
now you can't because if you ask
Facebook they'll tell you to jog on um
but with ZK you can enable these these
kind of these trustless oracles where
you can have users prove data Providence
I can basically go to a third party
service and say here is what Facebook is
saying about me and I can prove it's
true um through things like zuk TLS and
so what privacy can also enable is this
level is sort of a kind of adds en
forced composability
between Web Two services that don't want
to be composable um and that doesn't
really fit into this into the Privacy
Spectrum here like individuals in
institutions um but it's it's still a
very a very important value ad uh that
isn't yet really fully isn't I was I
wasn't going to say isn't fully explored
hasn't been explored at all yet um but
it's going to become a big thing in the
next 5
years
so if this is going to become kind of
like a large scale
problem that gets tackled and it's going
to become more and more integrated into
web 2 traditional like
Services um why didn't Aztec kind of
build uh a layer one why is Aztec
building on top of ethereum if we want
to make it easy for an institution to
onboard privacy tools and privacy
Solutions why do we also ask them to
understand like a base layer of a ium
and then additionally what Aztec is
doing why not just create an L1 and get
rid of kind of like some of the
explanations that it takes to onboard
like a new large scale entity well the
first thing is I would I would disagree
that it requires like this additional
kind of like contextual knowledge
because I I expect them basically just
to be abstracted away longer term you
know whether you're using an L1 or an L2
even an L3 or L whatever um that the the
the two lean technology type will
basically it'll just like a network um
you know like for example if I'm a if
I'm a user if I'm some random person who
stand up and I like I want to work I
want to do blockchain stuff right and I
create a wallet and I want to buy I want
to send stuff around if I'm transacting
on um if I'm transacting on arbitrum or
on ethereum or on Solano like it kind of
all looks the same to
me um the reason why we picked ethereum
is
because um it's because ethereum is
where the liquidity is it's where the
money is and privacy is not useful
without liquidity um unfortunately zcash
showed this like nobody cares about how
many magic beans you have therefore you
don't need to keep private how many
magic beans you have um but if you have
you know a multi-million dollar usdc
portfolio well H that's kind of that's
that's something different right you
know like when um if you have um
websites tracking whales and where you
know they they'll but people get alerts
whenever you send send send send money
around like that is important privacy is
only important if there's money at stake
ethereum is where all the money is so we
want to be as close to the source of
value as we can get which for Aztec is a
layer too MH and so will Aztec
ultimately become a multi-chain solution
yes uh it's inevitable um we want to
basically um like first the first goal
is get ass working um you know get get
to Main net but then after that we want
to create what I guess one could call an
Aztec stack where we enable effectively
privacy shields for every single chain
that's compatible with our with our Tech
so you know it could be L1 it could be
L2 can be L3 but we um we still we
always expect the um to to use ethereum
as the the fundamental consensus layer
um we'd rather not build a consensus
Network um ethereum's done that already
uh so um we'd like to use ethereum
consensus um but ultimately we want very
efficient um bridging between say port
ASC portals on arbitrum on salana on
wherever so that um everybody's
interacting on the ASC network with with
a single like shielded pool of assets
but they're coming from multiple
different sources can we take a step
back maybe and talk about the different
iterations of Aztec dating back to 2019
you you mentioned earlier in our
conversation that the first kind of
instance of Aztec being live was a very
simple shielded transaction um and over
the years you've been able to build and
iterate upon that and there have been
multiple versions of Aztec so maybe you
can just kind of walk us through what
like the major launches have been and
the major
Milestones totally yes this is this is
technically the fourth iteration of
Aztec really so as one was late 2019
2020 where um it wasn't a rollup so
every transaction was verified on
ethereum it was incredibly expensive um
and you could Shield token like any ic20
took and um send it around privately you
could do um you could do basic things
like um like ratio checks so you could
do like swaps of different currencies at
certain certain ratios to to do basic
trading uh but you only had um data
privacy uh you didn't have user privacy
so people could see who was interacting
but just not the values um so it was a
pretty primitive thing um especially by
by modern standards but at the time it
was uh you know it was it was it was
wasn't that it was pretty pretty pretty
revolutionary I think it was the first
um shielding shielding protocol for
theum uh but then in 2019 that's when um
I with with Ariel Gabon we developed
plon which is this um ZK snar which
enabled a lot much more advanced stuff
so we were like okay let's go back to
the drawing board let's make a roll up
um so that you don't just have private
um transactions on ethereum but they're
also cheap and so that became Aztec 2
which got launched in 2020
I think my memory is blurs these days
it's I'd have to check it out the the
press releases but I think it was 2021
um and that was a no maybe 20 it was a
few years ago um and that was the first
I think it was the first private rollup
ever um uh again we had to solve a lot
of the original problems to get that
system working um uh and so then there
you could have like relatively cheap
Shield of trans on on ethereum um we
then evolved that into something we
called Aztec connect um which didn't
just do shielded transfers but also
enabled um uh defy type activities so
back then we still couldn't get enable
full programmability the tech wasn't
that advanced we we had a we had plun we
we had a ZK snarks but um we didn't we
were missing a few components that we
needed to to really pull it off so we
were like okay what's the best we can do
well if we can't do pram abiliy what
about if from I 2 it's very easy to talk
anonymously to L1 apps so say I can
Shield some tokens some some eth into
Aztec and then I can get the a network
to proxy a transaction on L1 to swap
that eth to die um in in something like
un Swap and so the idea there would be
the identities of the the user would be
hidden because Aztec would effectively
be acting on your behalf and that was
something we were very proud of that was
as to connect and that was
2022 um uh it had it had several flaws
um the main one being it just it was
very hard to develop for uh because it
wasn't you didn't have programmability
it had a lot of like very um very
complicated software stack to u to use
um and again part of it is because we
were doing it for the first time we had
to figure everything out the first time
when it comes to these shielded proxy
transfers um and so 20 when 2023 rolls
around that's when there's been enough
advances and iterations that we can
finally like we have confidence we can
do the real thing now we can actually
make a programable private smart
contract Network um uh and we made the
hard decision to kill astec connect
because um we would have like the work
that we would had to put into it to make
it robust to make it fully
decentralized um would have consumed the
company's efforts and we really needed
to focus our resources on like the real
the real deal so that's then what what
internally we were calling ASX 3 which
we then decided to drop three that's now
Aztec um and that's that's the that's
the um the network where you know we've
we've got we've built out our um
developer Network we're turning that
into a full public test net um and yeah
we should have main um this
year so devet went live in August last
year correct so en encapsulated in devet
is uh a toolkit a quite robust toolkit
there's
sdks um there's a brand new programming
well language that you guys created no
um in order to embed uh private uh smart
contract functionality so maybe you can
share a little bit about what the
considerations were that went into
building Noir why did you have to create
a new rust based language as opposed to
using solidity something that all web 3
devs um inherently know um and why was
this kind of a a
for what empowers Dev net and and
eventually will main net totally so the
main the main reason why we went with
our own DS because privacy
is PR privacy changes a lot a lot about
the the transaction model on a
blockchain network um if you think about
solidity solidity is programming
language for the ethereum virtual
machine which is um fully transparent um
and and so the qu and but adding privacy
into a blockchain isn't isn't isn't just
a case of of like throwing a ZK snark on
top of it and going Tada it's private
you have to radically change the state
model of your blockchain and what do I
mean by that I mean that um uh for one
thing asex private State it's utxo based
like Bitcoin it's not account F because
if you have an account you have an
encrypted account um uh on a network
like ethereum okay so now nobody can see
your your your account balance but if
100 people send you money then you you
will see one encrypted account balance
change um for each transaction so that
information basically leaks the
transaction graph so um actually
managing like private State updates um
in a way that's not uh really really
complicated and difficult um required us
to build our own custom abstraction
layers around it and for that we needed
our own language um we we needed our own
language so that the language could
reflect the kind of the the the
semantics of private um State
transitions uh in a way that you can't
normally you can't do with um something
like solidity unless you add so much
stuff on top of it that it looks like a
different language um the other
consideration was um we we are quite
resource constrained with Aztec because
um if you're constructing zerge proofs
of your transactions and those
transactions are supposed to be private
that means they contain secrets that you
don't want to LEAP um which means you
ideally make the proof yourself on your
own Hardware like which is typically not
very good good um uh all the existing ZK
outfits right they they they prove their
transactions um in some in a large
centralized compute cluster because well
they can and that's what you would
that's what you do if you can because
it's it's fast we don't have that luxury
which means that the the ZK circuits
that our language produces have to be
relatively um relatively efficient um if
we were to you know um snakify um a
solidity virtual like like an AUM
virtual machine or solidity emulator
um that adds a lot of overheads which
means that then you wouldn't really be
able to make a proof of that transaction
on a laptop in a web browser
particularly that laptop is old or using
an old phone but with Aztec and no you
can uh because we've designed the
language from the ground up to be really
efficient for this this client side
proving environment and so those two
things combined are really why why we
need needed our own language so what
have you learned then since um devet
went live five months ago now and what
are some of the results you've seen from
the alpha build yeah totally so um we've
seen some amazing stuff from the alpha
builds like some really really
impressive like um portraits coming out
of it one of the things that was very
validating was just seeing the amount of
interest um that people put into and you
know like I think for two years in a row
like we were like one of we're one of
web three's fastest developer fastest
growing developer ecosystems um and
we're not even
alive uh and it's because of Noah it's
because you can use Noir in products and
services that have nothing to do with
Aztec um and that's something
fundamentally new you you're seeing this
for for example things like ZK passports
um which is a a team I'm very fond of
they're doing something really important
where you can basically they have an app
where you can just tap your passport to
your phone your passport will has has a
digital has a chip in it that will send
digital signature and you can make
proofs on your phone that um selectively
disclose information about your passport
so you can prove that you're a citizen
of a country without reving anything
else or prove your age without or
without revealing anything else um uh
like another one is um you like we've SE
we've seen some amazing like wallets
coming out of the alpha build um you
know uh also you know we um zik email
for example now has a an Noir
integration um which is the best for
clients proving which we're really fond
of um and but I think um the the the the
app that I think is really the really
demonstrates privacy in a very tangible
way to people is and on which is built
with no um where an onc allows you to
post on social media anonymously you
prove to um you basically you provide a
proof that you possess an account um
that you possess and you possess some
uncast tokens and then the uncast
account will tweet on your behalf um it
allows for anonymous social media
posting it's it's genius um I wish I'd
thought of it uh and um so yeah you know
like in terms of what we've learned yeah
we learned people are interested in what
we're doing which is is really good uh
we learned that we had a lot of work to
do in terms of you know performance
robustness stability um the language is
now a much better language than it was
in August um very robust and um we also
learned a few things like
decentralization is
hard because our definition is not
decentralized it's just runs locally on
a developers machine uh but for me that
we need to be fully decentralized from
from day one like that's that's
non-negotiable for us and so we also
want our test net to be decentralized
and um let me tell you there's a reason
why all the other l2s aren't bothering
to
decentralize but we're we're getting
there we're almost there now I hope this
isn't uh putting this question isn't
putting you into too much of a spicy
position but um when you look at like
Mina it's it's a zk1 and the a lot of
the development that's going on there
from my perspective The Outsider looking
in a lot of those daps are stuck in that
ecos system and so with a lot of the the
tools that are coming out with alphab
build do you think that poises the
developers that are building on Aztec
with maybe uh a better opportunity to
share their tools and their products
with people outside the ZK privacy realm
because you are an L2 that you can more
easily Implement Implement and integrate
with users that are familiar with other
networks
yeah I do think there is that um
Advantage I mean I think um you know I
don't want to throw shade on Mina
because they are like they're real
Trailblazers and what they've been doing
um you know and anyone working on
privacy uh Ted kids is a one of the good
guys in my opinion um uh they're also
live on Main now we're not so you know
um i' be I'd be in a glass house
throwing rocks if I was uh criticizing
them I do think that the the the choice
of being in L1
did limit them a little bit um I also
think that with Astic we made a very
conscious choice to create a language no
to program our contracts and we made a
very conscious choice that language
needed to be more than just an Aztec
Network tool it needed to be uh general
purpose language for for for private
programs for for ZK uh because then you
just get this very positive um Network
effect right where people come to your
ecosystem because they have their own
things they want to do they don't care
about Aztec but but you're providing
they providing Noir which they need they
then use Noir they create libraries for
Noir which will enhance the like the the
capability of all the atic applications
and also they provide scrutiny you know
like they improve because no is open
source you know you'll get Pro requests
into the repository which improve it as
a language you'll get feedback you'll
get all this useful useful stuff and so
certainly the the the pull of Noir and
therefore by extension Aztec is much
larger as a result than it would be if
we had um like a bespoke way of coding
our pic contracts that wasn't
particularly wasn't generic or
extendable um yeah I think I like nor is
a key key product in the Aztec um lineup
and essential for in my opinion for our
success as a network yeah I mean just
being in L2 and being able to build on
top of of other l1s and and having your
own smart contract makes it very
possible for for anyone to kind of like
build within an ecosystem in which
they're already familiar so um what were
some of the responses you received from
your test Dev so far were they able to
kind of like pick up the ball with Noir
and and start going was there um a lot
of friction and and learning the new
language was was it intuitive for for
the developers that are building in your
ecosystem I think yeah there was very
little friction in picking up the
language uh because of the design
decisions we made going into it you know
it's based around it's based heavily on
Rust so if you have some like you don't
need rust programming experience you
know like I'm not much of a rust Dev
myself and I I like to think I'm pretty
good at Noah um uh just just having just
general programming knowledge um will
give you what you need to pick it up um
it's uh like the feedback we've got from
it is very intuitive um you know and and
empowering because you know people don't
need like there's this view this's this
current view right right in web 3 that
you need to be this like kind of like
the specialist individual to be able to
program with privacy or dzk stuff and
that's not true with Noah um you know
like the
I guess when it comes to things like um
our like Early Access test net things
like that I mean like the the learnings
we're having are much more around the
the network architecture and the network
infray and basically just you know
fixing all the teating problems that
come up when you're creating something
from scratch uh but um and you know
improving the reliability of our
sequencing Network so we can maintain
you know decent GPS throughputs but
that's all yeah it's all been a very
very very valuable learning experience
for us will azex sequencer sequencer
Network be decentralized on launch of
mainnet yes be decentralized on launch
test net never mind main net um uh yeah
because uh you know for us it's we
there's a couple of things we we want we
need we don't just want to launch
decentralized we need to launch
decentralized because um Astic Network
needs to be like the internet is then a
fully distributed Network that no one
entity has control of um uh otherwise
because astec position really is like we
want to enable um we want to enable the
tools the services the software the
libraries for people to build
applications on ASC that are compliant
in whatever jurisdiction they're in um
but that the like that um we want to
make it possible for them to be
compliant but that the network itself is
a neutral entity and that the S of
regulations at the at the app the
location level this argument doesn't
work does not work if you have an entity
that controls the S network because then
the network itself is an application um
you know if the internet was if the the
the internet was like a server room in
California right like whoever controled
that server would uh would not be would
uh probably have a few governments
talking to them um and so I think Aztec
is quite fundamentally aligned with um
the values and Ethos of web 3 uh you
know because because of the raw
incentives the other LTS out there the
transparent ones they don't really have
incentives to decentralize because their
users don't really care and
decentralizing will make their
transactions more expensive um make
their TPS rates drop and given that
transaction cost in TPS is their main
competitive Advantage they're not going
to do that but for us it's different um
very different um but also outside of
that issue you know we want to address a
few few missteps we think that have
happened in in um L2 launches or just
web3 launches generally which is that um
you know like the typically a lot of
projects when they when they launch you
know like the tokens are heavily
controlled by um by insiders and like
they they might claim to be
decentralized but in reality than than
not just because of those those
proportions of thresholds um we want to
we want our sequences to be of like um
Partners in the devel deployment of the
as Network we want to make sure that um
enough of the network is is like the
control of the network is distributed to
as many actors as possible so that we're
not just decentralized on paper but
actually we are decentralized if if me
as the founder co-founder M want
something to happen on the network like
I've got to convince the community I
can't just do it that's for me that's
really important so then other than
worrying about the the architecture and
the infrastructure and making it as a
public good um a service that anyone can
use and it's the front end that has to
worry if they're achieving uh
jurisdictional or Regulatory Compliance
are there any other considerations that
Aztec needs to take into mind when it
comes to jurisdictional compliance when
you guys are building or is it simply
the perspective that if we build the
architecture right then it will be a
neutral place and we as a foundation
won't have to worry about X Y or Z there
we have a an start I said which guides
us which is it's about moral legitimacy
um we like I think it's a very like we
want to ensure that as a user of the S
network you can distinguish yourself
from any bad actor we don't want people
to like we don't want people to but
through as a consequence of interacting
with the work know that they are like we
don't want them to be able to um uh like
assist nefarious actors by like helping
them hide their transactions and so we
want to ensure that there's a very
robust Suite of software libraries and
tools that can be used by assing
developers to um to protect uses in that
regard you know um which with asex
Advanced programmability um is is a heck
of a lot easier um than moment to think
um you know like things like ZK passport
just to the iceberg but we want to make
sure that those those tools and software
exist um and uh I are promoted as um uh
standard by the community um and we'll
you know we'll do we'll do what we can
in terms of publicizing and um that to
make that happen but ultimately it's in
the community's hands yeah and so I mean
in the past couple years we've seen some
attacks on privacy preserving technology
from different regulatory entities
around the world um we saw tornado cash
kind of become a code nrata here in the
US um we've seen coin join coin join
service
um become code nrata even wallets like
Samurai wallet um shutter down access to
us-based Residents so do these kind of
attacks on privacy preserving
Technologies do they change the way in
which you you operate or is the
Northstar kind of the same since 2018
2019 and you just keep moving along the
path that the Northstar guides you
the North Star has always been the same
um to be honest uh but I would like we
Aztec
is like a oops um as is a network you
know um not an application I think this
is the important distinguisher you know
like what's missing right now is clearly
demonstrating the value of privacy um
you know outside of token mixing you
know like using privacy as a necessary
component to provide meaningful Services
um so for example you know doing things
like validating parts of your identity
or validating maybe you have you've gone
through a coinbase ID procedure or using
it in terms of onchain games where you
know like where that game cannot exist
without privacy um using privacy as a as
a component in comp in more complicated
products and services uh to me is is is
necessary to because when a launches we
we are in a we we have to very quickly
establish so this is a lot more than a
lot more than what's come before um but
that's that's on us to do you know um as
for the North Star yeah that's never
changed um it's just the way it is we
just got to we got to deal with the
world as it as it comes to us so 20125
is going to be a big year for Aztec
what's kind of the the Milestone
achievement when will you know that
mainnet is ready mainnet the launch was
successful um is it just going to be you
know the decentralized network launching
on day one and continuing to churn block
after block is it going to be a number
of users that start to access the
network is it going to be a number of
daps that start building on top of Aztec
what's kind of like the the marker that
you guys are going to use for for the
successes that you achiev this year we
have many um we have like we have a
multi road map you know where obviously
the the first major Milestone is um can
we deploy a network that CH produces
blocks um then can contracts be deployed
to that Network can you sustain like can
we sustain like certain TPS thresholds
what's the what's the block up time
percentage you know like there's um
launching is just the start it's not the
end um it's the end of the beginning uh
so from from after launch you know we
still have a a mission which is to um
always improve the the stability of the
network the security of the network the
throughput of the network ensuring that
um uh like like adding adding to its
technological um competences so that it
can handle more advanced use cases you
know like this is going to be an ongoing
project that lasts for many many years
um you know we're just hopefully this
year we are just firing the starting gun
and so if I could um make you take off
your Aztec hat for a second but keep on
your ZK hat if there's one kind of
trend that you expect to play out with
with zero knowledge technology in
2025 um whether Aztec builds it or not
uh what would you say that
is the trend I mean I don't know how
much I'm taking my head off here I think
the trend is privacy you know like 2024
was a year of scaling um and scaling
forys Z 2025 is a year for privacy you
know took us a bit of time to catch up
because it's a lot more complicated but
um yeah once people see what you can do
with private distributed Technologies
it's going to blow their minds it's
going to absolutely blow their
minds awesome um if anybody was
listening to this episode and wants to
reach out to you who do you want to talk
to and what's the best way that they can
contact you what's the best way you can
contact us well um we have a a website
um hc. network and on that website we
have links to our Discord which is
likely the the the best way to get in
touch um we also have Twitter accounts
um and uh we also have a um Forum where
we discuss more technical things because
we try to build in the open so you know
where we're discussing our architecture
ideas um like putting making making
requests for proposals and comments from
the community um but yeah you know
asset. network uh is the is the um first
place to go for sure I also want to let
you know that I watched your talk at
zk2 and you showed a road map on the
slide and you also showed a link to the
road map and said that you don't know
anyone who's ever gone to a link that
they've seen on a PowerPoint but I
actually did
I typed in the link from the PowerPoint
so oh you that you've warmed my heart
thank you so much that is that is that
is wonderful to hear thank you I will I
will change what I say from from now on
I will say that I only know one person
who's ever followed a link um on a on a
slide well I'm absolutely honored um
Zach it was phenomenal to to chat with
you today I personally know a builder or
two here in Colorado who have built on
top of Aztec in the past year or so so
it was nice to to finally be a to meet
one of the uh the folks task with
heading the network and um you know I
wish you nothing but the best of luck
and your team in continuing to build out
mainnet and as a web3 user and just a
human in general um I cannot wait to
have more privacy tools and solutions to
help keep me safe online so thank you
for the work that you do thank you very
much Dylan uh much appreciated and yeah
um stay stay stay tuned uh for for when
we launch thank you amazing Cheers
Cheers thank you so much for tuning in
to the smart economy podcast to stay in
the loop with all our latest episodes
and insights head over to
www.smart economy podcast.com and don't
forget to subscribe to our YouTube
channel for all of our video
content if you enjoyed today's
discussion please show your support by
liking commenting and reviewing this
episode
on your favorite podcasting platform
your feedback helps us reach more
listeners and bring even better content
your way we'd also love to hear from you
so please drop a comment on Spotify or
YouTube to share what topics you'd like
us to cover or who you'd like to see as
our next guest and if you know someone
who would make a great guest please
don't hesitate to reach out we're always
looking for fresh voices and New
Perspectives for our new token holders
please consider voting for Neo news
today as your Council representative
we've proudly been serving the Neo
ecosystem since
2017 we'll continue to do so by putting
portions of our Council rewards directly
back into ecosystem growth
initiatives thank you so much for taking
the time to listen to the smart economy
podcast and we can't wait to catch you
next time